README.md, before:

=======
# dojo.io site

This project was generated with the [Dojo CLI](https://github.com/dojo/cli) & [Dojo CLI create app command](https://github.com/dojo/cli-create-app).

## Build

Run `dojo build --mode dist` (the `mode` option defaults to `dist`) to create a production build for the project. The built artifacts will be stored in the `output/dist` directory.

## Content Build

Run `npm run build:content` to build the content

## Production Build

Run `npm run build` to create a development build for the project. The built artifacts will be stored in the `output/dev` directory.

## Development Build/Server

Run `npm run dev` to create a development build and start a development server. By default the server runs on port `9999`, navigate to `http://localhost:9999/`.

## Running unit tests

To run units tests in node only use `npm run test` which uses JIT (just in time) compilation.

To run the unit tests against built bundles, first the run a test build with `dojo build --mode unit`. The build test artifacts are written to the `output/tests/unit` directory.

Then `dojo test -c local` to run the projects unit tests. These tests are located in the `tests/unit` directory. The `--watch` options can be used with the test build which means that `dojo test` can be re-run without needing to re-build the full application each time.

## Running functional tests

To run the functional tests, first the run a test build with `dojo build --mode functional` and then `dojo test -f` to run the projects functional tests. These tests are located in the `tests/functional` directory.

## Further help

To get help for these commands and more, run `dojo` on the command line.

Commit message:

Update readme / docker with local setup (#43)
* Update readme / docker with local setup
* Update package-lock.json using node 10.15.1

README.md, after:

# dojo.io

Next generation dojo.io.

## Running dojo.io Locally

Build Time Rendering does not function properly with dojo's serve feature, so docker is used instead to serve up the static site (same as the Now deployments).

### Pre-requisites

The only pre-requisite is to have [Docker](https://store.docker.com/editions/community/docker-ce-desktop-mac) installed, running and logged in with a valid Docker account.

### Install, Build and Start Docker

1. Install, `npm install`
2. Build the site once, `npm run build:docker`
  - The docker build relies on the `dist` build of the site.
	- If you use VSCode you can set this command up as your default build task.
3. Start docker, `docker-compose up`
4. Go to http://localhost:9005/

### Start Docker

Run `docker-compose up -d`.

### View Docker Logs

Run `docker-compose logs -f`.

### Stop Docker

Run `docker-compose down`.

## Content Pipeline
Coming Soon

## Tests

We use Jest for unit tests on the site.

Run all unit tests, `npm run test` or `npm test` or `jest`.

## Now Deployments

On submission of a PR, an automatic deployment of the site is made to `now.sh`. The PR will be updated with the URL to the deployment automatically. You can test this deployment prior by running `now` locally (install the now cli with `npm install -g now`).
